---
layout: default
title: Description of Project.
description: Members of the project, previous and past.
---

## __Multiscale modeling of the battle over iron in invasive lung infection__  
Funding: NIAID 1R01AI135128-01

Invasive aspergillosis is among the most common fungal infection in immunocompromised hosts and carries a poor outcome. The spores of the causative organism, Aspergillus fumigatus, are ubiquitously distributed in the environment. Healthy hosts clear the inhaled spores without developing disease, but individuals with impaired immunity are susceptible to a life-threatening respiratory infection that can then disseminate to other organs. The increasing use of immunosuppressive therapies in transplantation and cancer has dramatically increased suffering and death from this infection, and this trend is expected to continue. Current therapeutic approaches have been focused primarily on the pathogen, but a better understanding of the components of host defense in this infection may lead to the development of new treatments against this infection, possibly in combination with  antifungal  drugs.  Iron  is  essential  to  all  living  organisms,  and  restricting  iron  availability  is  a  critical mechanism of antimicrobial  host defense against many microorganisms; conversely, successful pathogens have evolved potent mechanisms for scavenging iron from the host. These mechanisms have the potential to be harnessed therapeutically, for example with drugs that enhance the host’s iron sequestration mechanisms. The  overarching  goal  of  this  project  is  to  develop  a  multi-scale  mathematical  model  that  can  serve  as  a simulation  tool  of  the  role  of  iron  in  invasive  aspergillosis.  The  model  will  integrate  mechanisms  at  the molecular scale with tissue-level events and a whole-body scale capturing the role of the liver. The project brings an innovative approach to the study of this infection, and introduces innovative features to multiscale modeling through a novel modular software design that improves flexibility, reproducibility, and model sharing.

See the project's [Github wiki](https://github.com/LungFungalGrowth/afumigattus/wiki) for     more information.
## __Modular design of multiscale models, with an application to the innate immune response to fungal respiratory pathogens__  
Funding: NIBIB 1U01EB024501-01 

Increased availability of biomedical data sets across spatial and temporal scales makes it  possible  to  calibrate  complex  models  that  capture  integrated  processes  from  the  molecular  to  the  whole  organism  level.  This  complexity  poses  multiple  challenges  related  to  mathematical  modeling,  software  design,  validation,  reproducibility,  and  extensibility. Visualization of model features and dynamics is a key factor in the usability of  models  by  domain  experts,  such  as  experimental  biologists  and  clinicians.  The  proposed project addresses these challenges in the context of the immune response to an  important  respiratory  fungal  infection.  Its  goal  is  to  develop  a  novel  modular  approach  to  model  architecture,  using  a  recently  introduced  technology  of  lightweight  virtual  machines  and  our  user-friendly  open-source  platform  for  the  construction  and  linking  of  these  so-called  “Docker  containers”  to  create  complex  modular  models  in  a  transparent  fashion.  A  key  benefit  of  software  containers  is  that  they  can  encompass  the    entire    computational    environment    of    a    model,    enabling    unprecedented    reproducibility  of  computational  results.  The  overarching  computational  goal  is  to  develop  a  novel  approach  to  the  modular  design  of  multiscale  models.  While  broadly  applicable,   this   novel   computational   modeling   approach   will   be   focused   on   the   development of a multiscale model capturing the early stages of invasive aspergillosis, an  important  health  problem.  Invasive  aspergillosis  is  one  of  the  most  common  fungal  infections  in  immunocompromised  hosts  and  carries  a  poor  prognosis.  The  spores  of  the  causative  organism,  Aspergillus  fumigatus,  are  ubiquitously  distributed  in  the  environment.  Healthy  hosts  clear  the  inhaled  spores  without  developing  disease,  but  individuals  with  impaired  immunity  are  susceptible  to  a  life-threatening  respiratory  infection   that   can   then   disseminate   to   other   organs.   The   increasing   use   of   immunosuppressive therapies in transplantation and cancer has dramatically increased suffering  and  death  from  this  infection,  and  this  trend  is  expected  to  continue.  Current  therapeutic  approaches  have  been  focused  primarily  on  the  pathogen,  but  a  better  understanding  of  the  components  of  host  defense  in  this  infection  may  lead  to  the  development  of  new  treatments.  In  particular,  restricting  iron  availability  is  a  critical  mechanism  of  antimicrobial  host  defense;  conversely,  successful  pathogens  have  evolved potent mechanisms for scavenging iron from the host. These mechanisms have the  potential  to  be  harnessed  therapeutically.  The  biological  focus  of  the  proposed  project  is  the  battle  over  iron  between  the  fungus  and  the  host.  The  overarching  biomedical  goal  is  to  develop  a  simulation  tool  to  explore  the  role  of  iron  in  invasive  aspergillosis across biochemical and biophysical conditions.

See the project's [Github wiki](https://github.com/LungFungalGrowth/invasive-aspergillosis/wiki) for more information. 
